Docs: Consume API extensions (#1998)
vtex/faststore: apps/site/pages/docs/api-extensions.mdx

</Callout>

As stores grow, so does the possibility of using data from VTEX APIs that the FastStore API does not expose.
Another possibility is to use data that is provided by third-party APIs. In both cases, FastStore provides these features by using API Extensions.

Then, it's necessary to define which new fields will be exposed by the FastStore API Extension.

Inside the repository, there is a clear separation between what comes from VTEX APIs and what comes from third-party APIs. First, let's take a look at the VTEX APIs Schema extension possibility.

---

## Define VTEX APIs schema extensions

FastStore streamlines the way of using data from VTEX APIs that the FastStore API does not expose.

As FastStore uses GraphQL, it's required to write [type definitions](https://graphql.org/learn/schema/#object-types-and-fields) and [resolvers](https://graphql.org/learn/execution/#root-fields-resolvers) to fetch the data you need.

> You will learn how to do this using API Extensions by following the steps below.

Author: we changed this paragraph a little, can you please double-check?

> You will learn how to do this using API Extensions by following the steps below.

Reviewer: Great! 😃

### Folder Structure

> To declare a new type definition and resolver you need to create a directory structure like the one below. Please note that the `src/graphql/vtex/resolvers` and `src/graphql/vtex/typeDefs` path is mandatory, but you can organize the files inside those directory as you wish.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To declare a new type definition and resolver you need to create a directory structure like the one below.

<Callout type="warning" emoji="⚠️">
Note that the `src/graphql/vtex/resolvers` and `src/graphql/vtex/typeDefs` path is mandatory, but you can organize the files inside those directory as you wish.
</Callout>
```

Reviewer: Now, I'm not sure if we need this part. In line 66 we already say this, right?

Author: we added this Callout. As we updated the code, I ended up losing the reference for line 66 hahah, but I think they mean different things.

> To declare a new type definition and resolver you need to create a directory structure like the one below. Please note that the `src/graphql/vtex/resolvers` and `src/graphql/vtex/typeDefs` path is mandatory, but you can organize the files inside those directory as you wish.

Author: nice! done [here](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/pull/1998/commits/262f171e5d8e061fe57625ecbffa6ed3a58682bf)

> # API extensions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# API Extensions
```

In this guide, you will learn how to use the FastStore API Extension.

</header>

1. Define which new fields will be exposed by the FastStore API Extension.
2. Determine the GraphQL fragments where these fields will be used.
3. How to consume the new fields using [New Sections](/docs/building-sections/creating-a-new-section) or [Custom Overridable Components](/docs/building-sections/overriding-components-and-props#overriding-a-native-component).

> Although the [FastStore API](https://v1.faststore.dev/reference/api/faststore-api) provides a [GraphQL schema for ecommerce](https://v1.faststore.dev/reference/api/queries) that suits a general use case, some stores may need to access other, more specific, information.

Author: moved [here](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/pull/1998/commits/f572880d6b9a3e075bc3bb8e98c2363fdccf9017).

> It's not recommended to add other API endpoints to your storefront directly, since this may [impact site performance](https://v1.faststore.dev/how-to-guides/faststore-api/fetching-api-data#best-practices-for-fetching-data). 

Reviewer 2: We can use `Callout` component for this info.

Author: nice! done [here](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/pull/1998/commits/bc9e9af3f639d74cbe86a543bea36335ab9ad201).

> It's not recommended to add other API endpoints to your storefront directly, since this may [impact site performance](https://v1.faststore.dev/how-to-guides/faststore-api/fetching-api-data#best-practices-for-fetching-data). 

Author: done [here](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/pull/1998/commits/a678cf0461edb341038c321f81df77d6dbf8cac8)

> If you need to fetch more data, it is possible to extend the FastStore API schema, adding new data to the existing [queries](https://v1.faststore.dev/reference/api/queries).

Author: done [here](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/pull/1998/commits/a678cf0461edb341038c321f81df77d6dbf8cac8)

---

> ## Before you start

Reviewer 3: Make this a note under the header above.

Author: If I got it right, it was moved [here](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/pull/1998/commits/69b10bfb1fc1b1e640bff782c5a7b8a3db59592c).

> Note that even though you can add information to the FastStore API schema, you must be careful not to over-fetch data on your pages. See the [best practices for fetching data on your storefront](https://v1.faststore.dev/how-to-guides/faststore-api/fetching-api-data#fetch-only-the-data-you-need).

Author: Wrapped as `Callout` as info [here](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/pull/1998/commits/76e095f64e7cd0a55f334ba8ded288e795f6f954).

As stores grow, so does the possibility of using data from VTEX APIs that the FastStore API does not expose.
Another possibility is to use data that is provided by third-party APIs. In both cases, FastStore provides these features by using API Extensions.

Then, it's necessary to define which new fields will be exposed by the FastStore API Extension.

Inside the repository, there is a clear separation between what comes from VTEX APIs and what comes from third-party APIs. First, let's take a look at the VTEX APIs Schema extension possibility.

---

## Define VTEX APIs schema extensions

FastStore streamlines the way of using data from VTEX APIs that the FastStore API does not expose.

As FastStore uses GraphQL, it's required to write [type definitions](https://graphql.org/learn/schema/#object-types-and-fields) and [resolvers](https://graphql.org/learn/execution/#root-fields-resolvers) to fetch the data you need.
You will learn how to do this using API Extensions by following the steps below.

### Folder Structure

> The store's repository provides the following folder structure for the VTEX APIs Schema Extensions that are held in the `src/graphql/vtex` folder.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To declare a new type definition and resolver you need to create a directory structure like the one below. Please note that the `src/graphql/vtex/resolvers` and `src/graphql/vtex/typeDefs` path is mandatory, but you can organize the files inside those directory as you wish.
```

Your new type definitions set the data structure for your new fields, extended from the existing FastStore API GraphQL queries and types.

> You can create new `<typeName>.graphql` files inside the `vtex/typeDefs` folder. The way that it will be organized inside this folder is flexible, it's possible to create multiple typeDefs files or group them all together in just one file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can create new `<typeName>.graphql` files inside the `vtex/typeDefs` folder. The way that it will be organized inside this folder is flexible, it's possible to create multiple typeDefs files or group them all together in just one file. During the build process and when running the local server file, all `.graphql` files under this directory will be considered.
```

### Resolvers

Resolvers are the functions that give meaning to the data you have structured in the type definitions. This means a resolver will be executed when the corresponding piece of information is queried. These resolvers can perform an operation on an existing field, get data from the Root param, or fetch data from VTEX APIs, for example.

> You can create new `<resolverName>.ts` files inside the `vtex>resolvers` folder.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can create new `<resolverName>.ts` files inside the `src/graphql/vtex/resolvers` folder.
```

export default resolvers
```

> That's it, for the sake of exposing the new fields you only need to define these files within the vtex folder. The entire GraphQL creation process must be transparent and done in the background by the FastStore.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
That's it, for the sake of exposing the new fields you only need to define these files within the vtex folder. The entire GraphQL creation process is transparent and done in the background by the FastStore CLI.
```

export default resolvers
```

> That's it, for the sake of exposing the new fields you only need to define these files within the vtex folder. The entire GraphQL creation process is transparent and done in the background by the FastStore CLI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's it! Once you have defined these files in the `vtex` folder, the new fields are already exposed. The entire GraphQL creation process is automated and handled in the background by the FastStore CLI.
```

Author: Nice! done [here](https://github.com/vtex/faststore/pull/1998/commits/262f171e5d8e061fe57625ecbffa6ed3a58682bf)

---

> ## Define third-party APIs schema extensions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Defining third-party APIs schema extensions
```

Reviewer: We used **API Extensions** (with upper case) in the beginning and now **extensions** in lower case. We should define a pattern for it. Maybe just  "extensions".

          <br />
          - In the hook `useProductsQuery()`, in `ProductShelf`, `ProductTiles`
          components, that can be used on multiple pages.
          <br />
        </td>
        <td>
          General products data ([StoreProduct](https://v1.faststore.dev/reference/api/objects#storeproduct)) with the `totalCount` from [StorePageInfo](https://v1.faststore.dev/reference/api/objects#storepageinfo).
        </td>
        <td>
          Frontend data from the `useLocalizedVariables()` and `useSession()` hooks.
        </td>
      </ExtendableQueryTable>
    </details>
  </li>
</ul>

---

## How to consume FastStore API Extension

Once you define which new fields will be exposed by the FastStore API Extension, then determine the GraphQL fragments where these fields will be used.
Finally, it's time to know how to consume the new fields in your [New Sections](/docs/building-sections/creating-a-new-section) or [Custom Overridable Components](/docs/building-sections/overriding-components-and-props).

It's important to know that FastStore exposes the data that comes from FastStore API along with FastStore API Extensions inside a provider called `PageProvider`.

> This data comes as a `context` in `PageProvider`, and you can use some hooks to access it:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This data comes as a `context` in `PageProvider`. FastStore provides three specific hooks (`usePDP`, `usePLP`, and `useSearchPage`) and one generic (`usePage`) that you can use to access the data. If the component or section will always appear on a single page type, we encourage you to use the specific page hook. If it can be used on multiple page types, use the generic one and narrow it using the type assertion functions provided (`isPDP`, `isPLP`, `isSearchPage`).
```

I'd make this paragraph longer and remove all the code snippets below, as they mostly add noise IMO.

const context = usePDP()

```

The `usePLP()` hook is recommendable in cases where you use your section on PLP.

```ts copy
import { usePLP } from "@faststore/core"

const context = usePLP()

```

The `useSearchPage()` hook is recommendable in cases where you use your section on the Search Page.

```ts copy
import { useSearchPage } from "@faststore/core"

const context = useSearchPage()

```

The `usePage()` hook is recommendable in cases where you have one section that is used in more than one type of page.

```ts copy
import { usePage } from "@faststore/core"

const context = usePage()

```

This hook returns one of the following types as context: `PDPContext`, `PLPContext`, or `SearchPageContext`, and you can decide how to handle it depending on the page that will use this hook by passing the types as generics.

```ts copy
import { usePage } from "@faststore/core"

const context = usePage<PLPContext | SearchPageContext>()

```

Also, you can use type assertion functions so that you can leverage the use of typescript and get the correct types

```ts copy
import { isPDP, isPLP, isSearchPage } from "@faststore/core";

isPDP(context)
isPLP(context)
isSearchPage(context)

```

> ### Consume API Extensions data from new `Sections`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Consuming API Extensions data from new `Sections`
```

> Creates a new section using the [Creating a New Section](/docs/building-sections/creating-a-new-section) doc, and uses one of the hooks mentioned above.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if I get here 🤔 Do I create the new section using the doc and then I use one of the hooks?

Author: Yeah, that's almost the same example from the other doc. But here we added the hook.

This example represents the `CallToAction` section inside a PLP.

```ts copy
import { usePLP }  from "@faststore/core";

export interface CallToActionProps {
  title: string
  link: {
    text: string
    url: string
  }
}

export default function CallToAction(props: CallToActionProps) {
  const context = usePLP()
  return (
    <section>
      <h2>{`${props.title} ${context?.data?.namedExtraData?.data}`}</h2>
    </section>
  )
}

```

> ### Consume API Extensions data from custom components in `Section Overrides`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Consuming API Extensions data from custom components in `Section Overrides`
```

After [Overriding Native Components and Props](/docs/building-sections/overriding-components-and-props#overriding-a-native-component), you can also use the hooks inside custom components.

> This example represents the `CustomBuyButton` component that overrides the native `BuyButton` component from the `ProductDetails` section inside the PDP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following, the `CustomBuyButton` component overrides the native `BuyButton` component from the `ProductDetails` section inside the PDP.
```
